Guidelines on exposure levels for indoor air are
needed because indoor air is a significant source
of benzene exposure and inhalation is the main
pathway of human exposure to benzene. Benzene is
present in both outdoor and indoor air. However,
indoor concentrations are generally higher than
those in outdoor air owing to the infiltration
of benzene present in outdoor air and to the
existence of many other indoor sources. Typically,
indoor concentrations are below the lowest levels
showing evidence of adverse health effects.
Considering that benzene is present indoors and
considering personal exposure patterns, which are
predominantly indoors, indoor guidelines for
exposure are needed. Benzene is a genotoxic
carcinogen in humans and no safe level of
exposure can be recommended. The risk of toxicity
from inhaled benzene would be the same whether
the exposure was indoors or outdoors. Thus, there
is no reason that the guidelines for indoor air
should differ from ambient air guidelines. It is
also recommended we continue to use the same
unit risk factors. Long-term exposure to benzene
has been linked to leukemia and other blood
disorders, making it a significant indoor air
concern, particularly in homes with poor
ventilation or in areas near industrial sites.
Exposure to carbon monoxide reduces maximum
exercise ability in healthy young individuals
and reduces the time to angina and, in some
cases, the time to ST-segment depression in
people with cardiovascular disease, albeit at a
concentration that is lower than that needed to
reduce exercise ability in healthy individuals.
The relationship of carbon monoxide exposure and
the carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) concentration in
blood can be modelled using the differential
Coburn-Forster-Kane equation, which provides a
good approximation to the COHb concentration at
a steady level of inhaled, exogenous carbon
monoxide. Based on laboratory studies of
reduction in exercise capacity in both healthy
individuals and volunteers with cardiovascular
disease, it was determined that COHb levels
should not exceed 2%. Carbon monoxide is
particularly hazardous in enclosed spaces with
poor ventilation, such as garages, kitchens with
unvented stoves, and rooms with improperly
maintained heating appliances. Chronic exposure
to low levels of carbon monoxide has been linked
to neurological impairments, including memory
loss, decreased concentration, and increased
risk of cardiovascular disease. Infants, pregnant
women, and elderly individuals are particularly
vulnerable to carbon monoxide poisoning, which
can result in long-term cognitive deficits and
even fatality in severe cases.
An indoor air guideline for formaldehyde is
appropriate because indoor exposures are the
dominant contributor to personal exposures
through inhalation, and indoor concentrations
may be high enough to cause adverse health
effects. The lowest concentration reported to
cause sensory irritation of the eyes in humans
is 0.36 mg/m3 for four hours. Increases in eye
blink frequency and conjunctival redness appear
at 0.6 mg/m3, which is considered equal to the
no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL). There
is no indication of accumulation of effects over
time with prolonged exposure. The perception of
odor may result in some individuals reporting
subjective sensory irritation, and individuals
may perceive formaldehyde at concentrations
below 0.1 mg/m3. However, this is not considered
to be an adverse health effect. Formaldehyde is
also known to contribute to respiratory issues
such as asthma exacerbation, chronic bronchitis,
and even lung function impairment at elevated
concentrations. Chronic exposure has been
associated with an increased risk of
nasopharyngeal cancer and other upper
respiratory tract diseases.
The principal health concerns of exposure to
naphthalene are respiratory tract lesions,
including tumors in the upper respiratory tract
demonstrated in animal studies and hemolytic
anemia in humans. Lesions in the nasal olfactory
and, at higher concentrations, also in the
respiratory epithelia of rats appear to be the
critical non-neoplastic effect. At concentrations
about 100-fold higher than the lowest lesion
level, severe inflammation and tumors have been
reported to occur at these sites. Increased cell
proliferation due to cytotoxicity (cell damage)
is considered a key element in the development
of airway tumors. The likely involvement of
cytotoxic metabolites in the carcinogenic
response and the apparent primary
non-genotoxicity of naphthalene favor the
assumption of the existence of a threshold.
Therefore, the use of a lowest observed adverse
effect level (LOAEL)/NOAEL as a threshold,
combined with safety factors, is an appropriate
approach for setting indoor air guidelines to
minimize the carcinogenic risk to the
respiratory tract of naphthalene exposure.
Exposure to naphthalene has also been linked to
neurological symptoms such as dizziness,
headaches, and nausea, particularly in
individuals exposed in enclosed areas over
extended periods.
A 1-hour indoor nitrogen dioxide guideline of
200 μg/m3, consistent with the existing WHO air
quality guideline, is recommended. At about
twice this level, asthmatics exhibit small
pulmonary function decrements. Those who are
sensitized may have small changes in airway
responsiveness to a variety of stimuli already
at this level. Studies of the indoor environment
provide no evidence for an indoor guideline
different to the ambient guideline. An annual
average indoor nitrogen dioxide guideline of 40
μg/m3, consistent with the existing WHO air
quality guideline, is recommended. Chronic
exposure to nitrogen dioxide has been linked to
increased rates of respiratory infections,
exacerbation of asthma, and reduced lung
function growth in children. High concentrations
of nitrogen dioxide in indoor environments,
often resulting from gas stoves and unvented
heaters, can significantly worsen symptoms in
individuals with preexisting lung diseases such
as COPD.
Overall, maintaining low levels of these
hazardous substances in indoor air is critical
for public health. Adequate ventilation, proper
maintenance of appliances, and regular
monitoring of air quality can significantly
reduce exposure risks and improve indoor
environmental health. Technologies such as
activated carbon filters, air purifiers with
HEPA filters, and improved building materials
with low emissions can aid in minimizing indoor
air pollution. Public awareness and policy
interventions remain crucial to ensuring safer
indoor air quality standards.
Guidelines on exposure levels for indoor air are needed because 
indoor air is a significant source of benzene exposure and 
inhalation is the main pathway of human exposure to benzene. 
Benzene is present in both outdoor and indoor air. However, 
indoor concentrations are generally higher than those in outdoor 
air owing to the infiltration of benzene present in outdoor air 
and to the existence of many other indoor sources. Typically, 
indoor concentrations are below the lowest levels showing evidence 
of adverse health effects. Considering that benzene is present 
indoors and considering personal exposure patterns, which are 
predominantly indoors, indoor guidelines for exposure are needed. 
Benzene is a genotoxic carcinogen in humans and no safe level of 
exposure can be recommended. The risk of toxicity from inhaled 
benzene would be the same whether the exposure was indoors or 
outdoors. Thus, there is no reason that the guidelines for indoor 
air should differ from ambient air guidelines. It is also recommended 
we continue to use the same unit risk factors. Exposure to carbon 
monoxide reduces maximum exercise ability in healthy young individuals 
and reduces the time to angina and, in some cases, the time to ST-segment 
depression in people with cardiovascular disease, albeit at a 
concentration that is lower than that needed to reduce exercise 
ability in healthy individuals. The relationship of carbon monoxide 
exposure and the carboxyhaemoglobin (COHb) concentration in blood can 
be modelled using the differential CoburnForster-Kane equation, which 
provides a good approximation to the COHb concentration at a steady level 
of inhaled, exogenous carbon monoxide. Based on laboratory studies of 
reduction in exercise capacity in both healthy individuals and volunteers 
with cardiovascular disease, it was determined that COHb levels should not 
exceed 2%. The Coburn-Forster-Kane equation is used below to determine 
the levels of carbon monoxide to which a normal adult under resting 
conditions for various intervals can be exposed without exceeding a 
COHb level of 2%. The previous WHO guidelines were established for 
15 minutes to protect against short-term peak exposures that might 
occur from, for example, an unvented stove; for 1 hour to protect against 
excess exposure from, for example, faulty appliances; and for 8 hours 
(which is relevant to occupational exposures and has been used as an averaging 
time for ambient exposures). We do not recommend changing the existing guidelines. 
An indoor air guideline for formaldehyde is appropriate because indoor exposures 
are the dominant contributor to personal exposures through inhalation and indoor 
concentrations may be high enough to cause adverse health effects. The lowest 
concentration reported to cause sensory irritation of the eyes in humans is 
0.36 mg/m3 for four hours. Increases in eye blink frequency and conjunctival 
redness appear at 0.6 mg/m3, which is considered equal to the no observed adverse 
effect level (NOAEL). There is no indication of accumulation of effects over time 
with prolonged exposure. The perception of odour may result in some individuals 
reporting subjective sensory irritation, and individuals may perceive formaldehyde 
at concentrations below 0.1 mg/m3. However, this is not considered to be an adverse 
health effect. The NOAEL of 0.6 mg/m3 for the eye blink response is adjusted using 
an assessment factor of 5 derived from the standard deviation of nasal pungency 
(sensory irritation) thresholds, leading to a value of 0.12 mg/m3, which has been 
rounded down to 0.1 mg/m3. Neither increased sensitivity nor sensitization is 
considered plausible at such indoor concentrations in adults and children. 
This value is thus considered valid for short-term (30-minute) duration, and this 
threshold should not be exceeded at any 30-minute interval during a day. The principal 
health concerns of exposure to naphthalene are respiratory tract lesions, including 
tumours in the upper respiratory tract demonstrated in animal studies and haemolytic 
anaemia in humans. Lesions in the nasal olfactory and, at higher concentrations, 
also in the respiratory epithelia of rats appear to be the critical non neoplastic 
effect. At concentrations about 100-fold higher than the lowest lesion level, 
severe inflammation and tumours have been reported to occur at these sites. 
Increased cell proliferation due to cytotoxicity (cell damage) is considered 
a key element in the development of airway tumours. The likely involvement 
of cytotoxic metabolites in the carcinogenic response and the apparent 
primary nongenotoxicity of naphthalene favour the assumption of the existence 
of a threshold. Therefore, the use of a lowest observed adverse effect level 
(LOAEL)/NOAEL as a threshold, combined with safety factors, is an appropriate 
approach for setting indoor air guidelines to minimize the carcinogenic risk to 
the respiratory tract of naphthalene exposure. A 1-hour indoor nitrogen dioxide 
guideline of 200 μg/m3, consistent with the existing WHO air quality guideline, 
is recommended. At about twice this level, asthmatics exhibit small pulmonary 
function decrements. Those who are sensitized may have small changes in airway 
responsiveness to a variety of stimuli already at this level. Studies of the 
indoor environment provide no evidence for an indoor guideline different to the 
ambient guideline. An annual average indoor nitrogen dioxide guideline of 40 μg/m3, 
consistent with the existing WHO air quality guideline, is recommended. The ambient 
annual average guideline of 40 μg/m3 was initially based on a meta-analysis of indoor 
studies. It was assumed that having a gas stove was equivalent to an increased average 
indoor level of 28 μg/m3 compared to homes with electric stoves, and the meta-analysis 
showed that an increase in indoor nitrogen dioxide of 28 μg/m3 was associated with a 20%
increased risk of lower respiratory illness in children. Homes with no indoor sources 
were estimated to have an average level of 15 μg/m3. Several exhaustive reviews to further 
develop ambient guidelines have not challenged these findings. Recent well-conducted 
epidemiological studies that have used measured indoor nitrogen dioxide levels support 
the occurrence of respiratory health effects at the level of the guideline. Some polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are potent carcinogens and, in air, are typically
attached to particles. The primary exposure to carcinogenic PAHs found in air 
occurs via inhalation of particles. PAHs occur in indoor air as complex mixtures, 
the composition of which may vary from site to site. Experimental data on metabolism, 
gene expression and DNA adducts suggest that interactions between PAHs in mixtures 
may be complex and highly unpredictable for various PAH compositions 
(inhibitory, additive, synergistic). In view of the difficulties in developing 
guidelines for PAH mixtures, benzo[a] pyrene (B[a]P) was considered to represent 
the best single indicator compound. Its toxicology is best known, most single PAH 
concentration data in ambient and indoor air are for B[a]P, and B[a]P has widely been 
used as an indicator compound for exposure in epidemiological studies. The health 
evaluation data suggest that lung cancer is the most serious health risk from 
exposure to PAHs in indoor air. B[a]P is one of the most potent carcinogens 
among the known PAHs. In its evaluation of PAHs as ambient air pollutants in 
2000, WHO expressed a unit cancer risk as a function of the concentration of 
B[a]P taken as a marker of the PAH mixture. Use of the same unit risk factor 
for indoor air implies that B[a]P represents the same proportion of carcinogenic 
activity of the PAH mixture as in the occupational exposure used to derive the 
unit risk. This assumption will not always hold, but the associated uncertainties 
in risk estimates are unlikely to be large. Radon is classified by the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer as a human carcinogen (Group I). 
There is direct evidence from residential epidemiological studies of the lung cancer 
risk from radon. The exposure–response relationship is best described as being 
linear, without a threshold. The excess relative risk, based on long-term 
(30-year) average radon exposure is about 16% per increase of 100 Bq/m3, and 
on this relative scale does not vary appreciably between current smokers, 
ex-smokers and lifelong non-smokers. Therefore, as the absolute risk of 
lung cancer at any given radon concentration is much higher in current 
smokers than in lifelong non-smokers, the absolute risk of lung cancer 
due to radon is appreciably higher for current and ex-smokers than for 
lifelong non-smokers. For ex-smokers, the absolute risks will be between
those for lifelong non-smokers and current smokers. The cumulative risk 
of death from radon-induced lung cancer was calculated for lifelong 
non-smokers and for current smokers (15–24 cigarettes per day). The 
derived excess lifetime risks (by the age of 75 years) are 0.6 × 10–5
per Bq/m3 and 15 × 10–5 per Bq/m3, respectively. Among ex-smokers, the
risk is intermediate, depending on the time since smoking cessation. 
The radon concentration associated with an excess lifetime risk of 1 
per 100 and 1 per 1000 are 67 Bq/m3 and 6.7 Bq/m3 for current smokers
and 1670 Bq/m3 and 167 Bq/m3 for lifelong nonsmokers, respectively. 
The existence of both positive and negative results has in the past 
led risk assessors to different interpretations of trichloroethylene 
(TCE) toxicity and to divergent estimates of human cancer risk. For a
health risk evaluation, bearing in mind recent data on a mechanism of
action that is not species-specific, the evidence for weak genotoxicity,
and the consistency between certain cancers observed in animals and in 
humans (in particular liver cancer), it is prudent to consider that the
carcinogenicity in animals, the positive epidemiological studies and the
plausibility of a human cancer risk leads to the recommendation of a 
non-threshold approach with a risk estimate rather than a safe level. 
Therefore, carcinogenicity (with the assumption of genotoxicity) is 
selected as the endpoint for setting the guideline value. The unit 
risk estimates of 4.3 × 10–7 (μg/m3)–1, derived on the basis of increased
Leydig cell tumours (testicular tumours) in rats, is proposed as the indoor
air quality guideline. This was also the conclusion of WHO in 2000, the 
European Union in 2004 and the French Agency for Environmental and Occupational
Health in 2009. The concentrations of airborne TCE associated with an excess 
lifetime cancer risk of 1/10 000, 1/100 000 and 1/1 000 000 are respectively 
230, 23 and 2.3 μg/m3. Carcinogenicity is not selected as the endpoint for 
setting the guideline value for tetrachloroethylene, for three reasons: the
epidemiological evidence is equivocal, the animal tumours detected are not 
considered relevant to humans, and there are no indications that tetrachloroethylene
is genotoxic. The derivation of a guideline value is at present based on two 
non-neoplastic effects as the critical endpoint: impaired neurobehavioural 
performance and early renal changes. Based on a long-term LOAEL for kidney 
effects of 102 mg/m3 in dry cleaning workers, a guideline value of 0.25 mg/m3 
has been calculated. In deriving this guideline value, the LOAEL is converted 
to continuous exposure (divided by a factor of 4.2 (168/40)) and divided by an
uncertainty factor of 100 (10 for use of a LOAEL and 10 for intra-species variation).
Recognizing that some uncertainty in the LOAEL exists because the effects observed at
this level are not clear-cut and because of fluctuations in exposure levels, an 
alternative calculation was made based on the LOAEL in mice of 680 mg/m3 and 
using an appropriate uncertainty factor of 1000. This calculation yields a 
guideline value of 0.68 mg/m3
